# Moving Motion Forward

When I think about motion design on the web, I cannot help but recollect how Flash helped define its early history. As a senior in high school, I sat at my local Borders reading Hillman Curtis’ _Flash Web Design_ absorbing all I could about the possibilities of this technology. In the fall of 2000, if a site required rich animation or motion-driven interactions, the odds were that Flash was the tool that was going to make it happen.

Regardless of Flash’s shortcomings as a content platform, as a design tool, it gave a lot of control to its users—especially in terms of sculpting how things were going to move around the screen. The power to adjust an animation’s properties and instantly see the results allowed designers to consider motion as a core component of design in the same way as typography or layout. When done well, motion design reveals another dimension to how we relate to content. Like a typeface, it colors how information is perceived. Like a layout, it re-prioritizes and frames ideas.

More than ever before, today’s web can render authentic, meaningful, fluid animation without relying on 3rd party browser extensions like Flash. While the technologies to render this type of animation in the browser have evolved, there hasn’t quite been a tool that allows for its production in the same way since Flash. The design artifacts that I create range in fidelity, but they typically describe a combination of aesthetics, content, interaction, and behaviors. When I think of motion as one of the qualities that they articulate, iteration proves challenging because it is hard to present in a realistic way while designing it. I might describe how I want something to move with words, or storyboard it on paper; but until I actually see the movement occur, it is still a rendition that is largely open to interpretation. This leaves the essence of the motion largely unrealized until a more accurate and detailed articulation exists.

Flash may have gotten us thinking about motion design earlier in a process, but at its peak it was the means AND the end. Today, we could replace Flash with any number of tools that allow us to design with roughly the same level of fidelity—eventually developing the production code with HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. In searching for other, more modern, tools, I considered the balance of building cheap prototypes vs. fully functional HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. Striking such a balance may not mean using the same tool for every project. It might even mean going  _back_ to Flash, if that is the best tool for a designer to demonstrate an idea without expending a lot of time. Not all projects, designers, and stakeholders require the same qualities in the artifacts produced—or the tools used to produce them.

Designers have been talking about [using Keynote](http://www.edenspiekermann.com/blog/espi-at-work-the-power-of-keynote) to mock up medium-fi design artifacts for years. Until recently, I have found this challenging to work into my process because unlike Photoshop or Sketch, Keynote lacks the features for designing and editing detailed aesthetic components. I started to see the tool differently when I came across [Google Material Design](http://www.google.com/design/spec/material-design/introduction.html) replicated [entirely in Keynote](http://vimeo.com/100377108). Rather than using Keynote as an aesthetic design tool, the author of this video, Andrew Haskin, recommends using it in combination with other design tools to prototype different types of animations. Being familiar with the simplicity Keynote’s animation options, I was skeptical in its ability to mock up anything resembling an elegant UI animation. Pleasantly, I was  proven wrong after [downloading the Keynote source file](https://app.box.com/s/q06fnhk09asgvx94a5gy) and finding all the  animations living right inside the slide deck.

> In my work, there’s constant discussion about which is the best and hottest new design tool to use. I’ve tried many of them, but in the end I still keep coming back to Keynote. It’s easy to learn and use, swapping assets is a breeze (using media placeholder), and most complex animations can be tested with Magic Move (the secret sauce to it all). Producing animations can span a range of fidelities; I can produce all the assets in Keynote, or I can copy out of Illustrator or drag and drop from Sketch (how seamless this works puts a smile on my face every time). - Andrew Haskin, author of _Keynote does Material Design_

Keynote allows the creation of cheap, simple, easily understood motion design prototypes. The software has a low learning curve and is free (with Mac OS X Mavericks), which makes it good for cross-team collaboration. Where Keynote falls short, however, is in shaping the minutiae of interactions and animations. Because the software is designed for creating presentations, Keynote doesn’t have the same interaction interface as a web page. Things like hover, swipe, and touch are absent—animations must either occur when a slide loads, on click, or in a queue with another animations. Animation curves are also limited to Keynote’s controls over easing and timing. Keynote has four basic easing options: none, ease-in, ease-out, or both (no numeric inputs for these).  When coupled other applications like Photoshop, Illustrator, or Sketch Keynote a very handy motion design tool. Despite the lack of tools to finely sculpt motion, using Keynote’s basic animation options might be good enough to build it and refine these smaller details in the browser.

If more granular control is what you’re after, [Framer Studio](http://framerjs.com/) might be the tool for you. In a lot of ways, using Framer for the first time reminded me of working in Flash. Framer Studio is a self-contained application that fits nicely in a workflow of common design applications already in use. The designer is given the power to use the robust built-in animation library of Framer.js complete with custom hardware accelerated animation curves, easing, and [full set of interactions](http://examples.framerjs.com/#event-basics.framer) found across modern devices.

>  Framer Studio is built on Framer.js, an open source framework for rapid prototyping. Framer allows you to define animations and interactions. It runs on mobile devices, too. - http://framerjs.com

One of the nicest features of this app is the ability to import PSDs, After Effects, or Sketch files and bring the individual layers to life with custom interaction and motion design. While this is achieved by writing [CoffeeScript](http://coffeescript.org/) to control the imported layers, it becomes greatly more efficient than recreating them as elements in the browser. These layers are converted to individual images that allow Framer Studio to output a package of  HTML, CSS, and JavaScript that can be viewed in any webkit based browser (desktop or mobile) making it ideal for sharing and gathering feedback.

In the example below, I have designed a button in Photoshop  intended to be used for favoriting or un-favoriting a piece of content. Each component of the button was isolated to its own layer group in the PSD: one for the grey container, one for each side of the heart, and one for the empty heart. Using Framer Studio’s import PSD functionality, I was able to directly add interaction and animation utilizing framer.js’s spring physics.

(see attached heartbreak.gif)

To achieve the heartbreak effect, we tell each side of the heart to move along their x-axis 20px from their respective starting points. We will also tell each side to fade out and add some motion blur in this block of code to be executed on click:

	// get the initial location of each side of the heart
	initHeartLeftLoc = button["Heart Left"].x
	initHeartRightLoc = button["Heart Right"].x

	// break the heart on click, if it is currently is full
	button["Heart Left"].animate
		properties: {x: initHeartLeftLoc-20, opacity: 0, blur: 5}
		curve: "bezier-curve"
		time: .25

	button["Heart Right"].animate
		properties: {x: initHeartRightLoc+20, opacity: 0,  blur: 5}
		curve: "bezier-curve"
		time: .25

To mend this broken heart, we can do the opposite. Move each side of the heart back to its original position while fading it  in.  This time, we are using a spring animation curve to add some bounce when the two sides collide:

	// mend the heart on click, if it is currently is empty
	button["Heart Left"].animate
		properties: {x: initHeartLeftLoc, opacity: 1, blur: 0}
		curve: "spring(600,20,5)"
	button["Heart Right"].animate
		properties: {x: initHeartRightLoc, opacity: 1, blur: 0}
		curve: "spring(600,20,5)"

Designers at companies like Dropbox, Google, and Facebook have started using Framer to build motion design prototypes based on real graphic design artifacts. Check out [the examples page](http://examples.framerjs.com/#carousel-onboarding.framer) to see some the types of prototypes that are being built. Unlike Keynote, Framer Studio has some barriers to entry that might not make it the right tool for everyone.  If you’re a designer who has absolutely no coding experience, the CoffeeScript component will be very foreign to you, requiring some additional learning to get going—maybe it’s an excuse to learn some code? With the current version at $79.99 per license (volume licensing is available), this could be a sizable  investment in an application dependent on a design team’s ability or willingness to write the interaction and animation logic in CoffeeScript. 

Deciding on which tools you use to articulate motion design is second to the results that are achieved. Without even knowing it you may already have an application that can help create this articulation. Look around, experiment, find what works for your project and your team. No matter what you end up using, if it helps you design motion as a more integrated component of the design system—it has done its job. As the web embraces more animations, interactions, and different types of hardware, motion design, as a pillar, will need to support it. To truly harness the power of  what motion design can become on the web, this pillar must be built alongside the other  elements  of design that we so carefully consider.